Add Operational Design guidelines for Upgrading Daml Apps section (#896)
digital-asset/docs.daml.com: docs/2.10.0/docs/upgrade/smart-contract-upgrades.rst

Package Selection in the Ledger API
===================================

> Until the introduction of SCU, template IDs in requests to the Ledger API

Reviewer: What about "references to templates" instead of "template IDs"? You use "template reference" a few lines below and I think it's less confusing because "ID" is a bit overloaded here.

Even if we don't switch to the "reference" terminology, then I still would suggest simplifying this paragraph with something like:

> Until the introduction of SCU, template IDS in requests to the Ledger API were all of the form ``<package-id>:<module-name>:<template-name>``.

could only be scoped by package-id, with the template fully
qualified name of format ``<package-id>:<module-name>:<template-name>``.
For disambiguation, going forward, we refer to this format as **by-package-id template IDs**.

With SCU, we introduce a more generic template reference of the format

> ``#<package-name>:<module-name>:<template-name>`` (**by-package-name template ID**)

Author: Please shout if you know of or have a better agreed-upon name for template ids with package name format. I was considering `by-package-name template reference` as well or just `template reference` but they are still slightly ambiguous

Reviewer: I like "by-package-id template reference" and  "by-package-name template reference" more than "by ... template ID". This is the terminology we use internally: `TypeConRef`, which is the type of variables typically called `packageRef`, can be both qualified by package name or ID. `Ref.Identifier` which is the type of variables typically called `templateId` can only be qualified by package ID.

Another reason to prefer "reference" over "ID" is that on its own, `#<package-name>:<module-name>:<template-name>` does not identify a unique template. You need the package preference for that.

Yet another reason to prefer "reference" over "ID" is that then "ID" can still be used to refer to canton's internal concept of "a unique identifier for a given package" after resolution of the references.

Now I don't know if that's the terminology we use in the ledger API and its documentation. If the fields are called `template_id`, then maybe it's a good idea to keep it that way.

Reviewer: About "by-package-id" vs "by-package-name": these names are a bit awkward but I'm not sure how to be less awkward without losing the precision. One idea I had but I can see be controversial at this point was to call them "static template refs" and "dynamic template refs".

that scopes templates by package-name, allowing version-agnostic addressing of templates on the Ledger API.
It serves as a reference to all template IDs with the qualified name ``<module-name>:<template-name>``

> from all packages with the name ``package-name`` known to the Ledger API server.

Reviewer 2: Nice.

`By-package-name template ID` addressing is supported for all upgradable packages (LF >= 1.17)
and is possible on both the write path (command submission) and read path (Ledger API queries).

The `by-package-name template ID` is only a Ledger API interface concept.
Internally, Canton continues to use the fully qualified template ID for all operations.
Therefore, when the new format is used in requests to the Ledger API,
a dynamic resolution is performed as described in the following sections.

.. _package-preference:

Package Preference
------------------

On processing a command submission, there are scenarios where the Ledger API server needs

> to disambiguate `by-package-name template IDs` to `by-package-id template IDs` (see :ref:`dynamic-package-resolution-in-command-submission`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to resolve `by-package-name template IDs` to `by-package-id template IDs` (see :ref:`dynamic-package-resolution-in-command-submission`).
```

> to disambiguate `by-package-name template IDs` to `by-package-id template IDs` (see :ref:`dynamic-package-resolution-in-command-submission`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to resolve `by-package-name template IDs` to `by-package-id template IDs` (see :ref:`dynamic-package-resolution-in-command-submission`).
```

For this purpose, the **package preference** concept is introduced
as the mapping from package-name to package ID for all known package-names on the participant.

The package preference is needed at each command submission time and is assembled from two sources:

- The **default** package preference of the Ledger API to which the command is submitted.
  This is the exhaustive mapping from package-name to package ID for all known package-names on the participant.

>   If multiple package IDs exist for a package-name, the package ID pertaining to the package with the highest

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  If multiple package IDs exist for a package-name, the package ID of the package with the highest
```

  version is used.

- The Ledger API client **override** as the

>   :ref:`package_id_selection_preference <com.daml.ledger.api.v1.Commands.package_id_selection_preference>` in a command submission.

Reviewer 3: This reads weird. Can you find a formulation that does not use "the override" as a noun?

Perhaps "the package-id selection preference list specified in the submitted command".

>   This is a package-name to package ID resolution list explicitly provided by the client to

Reviewer: Technically it's just a list of package ids right? The package names are implied.

  override the default package preference mentioned above.

   - See :ref:`here <daml-script-package-preference>` for how to provide this in Daml-Script

   -  **Note:** The :ref:`package_id_selection_preference <com.daml.ledger.api.v1.Commands.package_id_selection_preference>`
      must not lead to ambiguous resolutions for package-names,
      meaning that it must not contain two package-ids pointing to
      packages with the same package-name, as otherwise the submission will fail with
      an ``INVALID_ARGUMENT`` error.

.. note::
    **Important**: DAR uploads change the package preference on the participant.
    If a new uploaded DAR contains an upgradable (LF >= 1.17) package with a higher version
    than the existing package preference for the same package name,

>     the preference is updated to the new package ID.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    the default preference map is updated to the new package ID.
```

Author: 👍 But I would not add map since I didn't mention it before

    Essentially, this affects the Daml code version used in command submissions.

.. _dynamic-package-resolution-in-command-submission:

Dynamic Package Resolution in Command Submission
------------------------------------------------

Dynamic package resolution can happen in two cases during command submission:

> -  For command submissions that use `by-package-name template ID`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-  For command submissions that use a `by-package-name template ID`
```

   in the command’s templateId field (e.g. in a
   create command :ref:`here <com.daml.ledger.api.v1.CreateCommand>`)

> -  For command submissions leading to Daml transactions that contain

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-  For command submissions whose Daml interpretation requires the execution of
```

>    interface exercises or fetches.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   interface choices or fetch-by-interface actions.
```

**Note:** We still recommend against depending on Daml Script for
ledger-uploaded packages, even in this case with non-serializable positions.

> Operational Design Guideline for Upgrading Daml Apps

Author: @meiersi-da Can you please review this section?

Author: This essentially addresses UPD-5 and UPD-10

----------------------------------------------------

When considering upgrading, we regard each Daml application as composed of:

- **On-ledger components**: The Daml code running the on-ledger logic (i.e. the DARs uploaded

>   on each involved participant node)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  to all participant nodes interacting with the app)
```

- **Off-ledger components** interacting with the ledger via the Ledger API or other supported
  Canton Ledger API clients (JSON API or PQS).

>   These are typically Java or TypeScript services performing off-ledger business logic.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  These are typically Java or TypeScript services implementing off-ledger business logic.
```

Zero-Downtime Upgrades
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Upgrading an application without operational downtime can be achieved by designing the above-mentioned components to allow:

- **Asynchronous rollout**: Operators deploy updated software at their own pace,
  similar to established CI/CD practices in micro-service environments.

> - **Synchronous switch-over**: All workflows switch to the updated logic at a specific point in time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Synchronous switch-over**: All components switch to using updated Daml code at the same time.
```

**Designing for asynchronous upgrade roll-outs**

To allow for asynchronous roll-outs, off-ledger components should:

- **use package names in Ledger API requests**:
  Services interacting with the Ledger API should use `by-package-name template IDs`
  instead of `by-package-id template IDs` in all their command submissions and queries.
  This allows:

>     - Ledger API server-side version selection the package preference for command submissions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Ledger API server-side version selection of the package preference for command submissions.
```

    - reading all versions of the templates in queries, even newer versions

>       than the one the service was developed against

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      than the one the component was developed against.
```

- **handle missing optional fields**:

>   Services reading from the Ledger API or Ledger API clients

Reviewer 3: Service vs. component ... pick one and use it consistently.

  must be prepared to handle missing optional fields in records,

>   including those in the initial package.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  including those in the initial package.
  The TypeScript and Java codegens for reading Daml values do so by default.
```

  The TypeScript and Java codegens for reading Daml values do so by default.

- **use exhaustive package preference**: on each command submission, the ``package_id_selection_preference`` is set ensuring that:

    - For every package used in the command and for every package used for the all possible interface instances,

>       there is an association between the package name and the package ID of a precise package included in the package preference.

Reviewer: Since technically `package_id_selection_preference` is just list of package IDs, we could simplify to:

> The package ID of every package used in the command and of every package used by all possible interface instances is included in the package preference.

    - Within an application, all submissions use the same package preference.

.. note::
    Following these recommendations decouples the application's behavior from the DAR uploads
    (see :ref:`the note regarding Package Preference <package-preference>`),
    as package resolution is fully determined by the explicit
    and exhaustive package preference provided in command submissions.

**Operational steps for upgrading**

Once a new Daml package version of the application is ready, define an operational window
for allowing the asynchronous rollout of the updated components.
During this window, Canton node and off-ledger app operators should:

- Upload the upgraded DARs to the participant nodes

> - Roll-out the updated off-ledger components

Reviewer 2: It is a shame that this has to happen during the, possibly short operational window. There may be several apps each of which needs approvals etc. Another way to do it could be to roll out an app that can work with either the old or new daml models and just need to be switched to use the new package-preference list during the operational window.

Author: > Another way to do it could be to roll out an app that can work with either the old or new daml models and just need to be switched to use the new package-preference list during the operational window.

So the idea is exactly this: The apps work in a backwards compatible manner. The operational window is there just for setting some deadline after which the new code is executed. Or you meant that we can even go without a deadline? That would really be tricky since it would mean that off-ledger services should have some sort of forward compatibility (old off-ledger services being able to seamlessly participate to the upgraded workflow). Happy to discuss further though and open another amendment PR if you feel strongly about this.

After the operational window passes, the application can switch-over to the upgraded logic as such:

> - A switch-over time is decided and communicated to all client applications in advance,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A switch-over time is decided and communicated to all app clients in advance,
```

> After the operational window passes, the application can switch-over to the upgraded logic as such:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the operational window passes, the application can switch over to the upgraded logic as such:
```

  along with the updated package preference pertaining to the application's upgraded DARs.

> - As a recommendation, the switch-over time is signalled via some off-ledger workflow/communication channel.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- For example, you may encode the switch-over time in a config value set on all components; or publish it at a well-known HTTP endpoint from which all components read it.
```

> - For example, you may encode the switch-over time in a config value set on all components; or publish it at a well-known HTTP endpoint from which all components read it.

Reviewer: Seems like this is part of the previous point and doesn't warrant its own bullet.

- After the switch-over time, all Ledger API clients update their package preference
  and use it for subsequent command submissions.

.. note::
    Ledger API clients or participant nodes that do not finish the components rollout before the update switch-over time
    may not be able to participate in the upgraded workflow.

.. _backwards-incompatible-changes:

Rolling out backwards-incompatible changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some changes to a Daml workflow cannot be made backwards-compatible,
such as changing the definition of a template in a breaking way (e.g., extending the observer set).

> To handle such changes, replace the existing contract with an upgraded one of the target template
> (even if it is upgrade-incompatible with the source template). Proceed as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To handle such changes, you can replace the existing contract with an upgraded one of the target template as follows:
```

- Introduce the target template as a new template following the :ref:`Breaking changes via Explicit Package Version <upgrade-package-naming>`

> - Add a consuming ``upgrade`` choice to the existing template by rolling out a new version in a backwards-compatible fashion.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Add a consuming ``OriginalTemplate_UpgradeToNewTemplate`` choice to the existing template by rolling out a new version in a backwards-compatible fashion.
```

Reviewer 3: adjust all other references to this choice.

- Where required, provide reference data for the ``upgrade`` choice via additional choice arguments.

> - Using backend automation or a contract migration tool similar to the one described :ref:`here <upgrade-overview>`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Implement backend automation or a contract migration tool similar to the one described :ref:`here <upgrade-overview>`
```

>   to migrate old contracts to the new ones by exercising the ``upgrade`` choice on the existing contracts.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  to migrate all old contracts to the new ones by exercising the ``upgrade`` choice on the existing contracts.
```

.. note::
    Rolling out backwards-incompatible changes as described in this section
    incurs downtime on affected workflows until their contracts have been converted by the automation.
    In order to not disrupt business, such rollouts should be executed during maintenance windows.

.. note::

>     Note that this kind of upgrade requires O(#number-of-active-contracts) of transactions to roll out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Note that this kind of upgrade requires O(number-of-active-contracts) of transactions to roll out.
```

nit: I think # and number are redundant, so I propose to remove the #
